I'm Ben fulan welcome more than two
months of war between Israel and Hamas
have passed and the death toll continues
to rise Health officials in the Hamas
rang Gaza Strip say over
177,000 people have died in the fighting
mainly civilians that's stoking
international calls for a ceasefire US
Secretary of State Anthony blinkin has
called on Israel to prioritize the
protection of civilian life again
underscoring Washington's position on
the
war
as we stand here almost a week into this
campaign in the the south after the end
of the humanitarian uh pause it is
imperative it remains imperative that
Israel put a premium on civilian
protection and there does remain a gap
between exactly what what I said when I
was there the intent to protect
civilians and the actual results that
we're seeing uh on the ground and let's
go over to Tanya Kramer in Jerusalem
blink's strongest public criticism of
Israel's conduct of the war on Hamas the
reaction
there well we've heard over the past
weeks there more more pressure by the
United States and more push back you
know to do more uh to protect uh
Palestinians uh by the civilian
population in Gaza now Israel has said
uh for many weeks uh as well that
they're claiming basically Hamas that
they are using civilians as a human
shield and they are saying the military
here that they doing uh a lot to protect
civilians to tell them to evacuate uh
certain areas to give them corridors to
move they also published a map you know
detailing uh putting splitting up Gaza
in in hundreds of little districts but I
talk to people in Gaza on the phone as
we as journalists cannot go there uh
they're telling me this is very
confusing uh we we have to understand
that over an estimated number of 1.8
million uh people out of the the 2.2
million residents uh in Gaza they have
been displaced they all moved many of
them moved to the South and of course
now the ground operation also being
expended to the South people simply have
no place to go anymore to to be safe
there's no safe area that's what they
are telling me and even if there are
evacuation calls to go to certain areas
there's still also air strikes on other
areas so people are saying if there's no
call for full ceasefire there's no
safety and sec security for uh for them
in Gaza at the moment ananya on the
humanitarian front we've heard that
Israel is setting up a second checkpoint
for trucks bringing Aid to Gaza how is
that going to
help well there's talk about the opening
or at least the partially opening of the
Kum Shalom Crossing now the beginning of
the war uh Israel had close both of its
crossings that are going into Gaza so
one is in the north that's the Aris
cross Crossing this is only for uh
people uh to cross in and out this one
is closed and there is also the uh Kum
Shalom Crossing in the South which has
also been closed this is where uh before
the war usually Goods uh were going in
and out right now eight is only coming
in through the Rafa Crossing uh with
Egypt so there has been talk there's no
time frame given if this will actually
happen that the crossing uh the km
Shalom Crossing could uh help with the
screening and you know the security
mechanism that Israel wants to see in
place but uh the other problem actually
is not just the crossings what we're
hearing from uh humanitarian
organizations from the United Nations is
actually right now the distribution of
uh humanitarian Aid coming into Gaza
because as there's heavy fighting
reported also in the South so most of
the trucks that are coming in and
they're not that many coming in but
those are coming in you know they cannot
reach the middle areas or the northern
part or even in the the South it's quite
limited what we are hearing uh from the
United Nations and we had the uh under
General Secretary Martin C saying that
we don't we do not have a humanitarian
operation in southern G that you can
call a humanitarian operation I'm paraph
phrasing here uh anymore because you
know this is uh very difficult now to
get the humanitarian Aid two people
there an you mentioned the fighting in
the South what is the military situation
right now for Israel
well Israel is pushing ahead with its
ground operation there's still fighting
going on also of course uh in the
northern area of the Gaza Strip but
there's a lot of uh Focus now on the
souths especially on the city uh of Khan
Yunis uh where Israel is saying that
they assume part of the uh Hamas
leadership might be in that area it's
also the hometown of yah Sina the Hamas
leader who is seen by Israel as as the
main architect of the October 7th uh
terrorist attacks so most of the uh a
lot of focus is on the southern area at
the moment with you know bombardment air
bombardment and and uh ground operations
focusing also now on the whole of of the
Gaza Strip Tanya thank you very much for
the update our correspondent in
Jerusalem our correspondent Tanya ker in
Jerusalem and we'll talk to the Red
Cross in a moment in Gaza first Israel
says it will not let up in its strive to
eliminate Hamas considered a terrorist
group by numerous countries here's more
on the fighting in the south of the
territory and the dire humanitarian
situation physical and emotional trauma
continue to rain down on the Palestinian
people of
Gaza and despite Israel declaring some
areas to be safe zones air strikes are a
constant
threat
we are with children old people and
women I beg you not to bomb
us she and her family are among the 1.8
million people who are internally
displaced that's 80% of the population
places to seek shelter are ever
shrinking those who are able to escape
bombings with their lives are barely
living at all food water and other
Basics are
scarce we came here and as you see there
is no shelter no tent nothing and even
water there are no toilets look at our
children how they look there is no place
to shower them today there were fights
with people because of a small place we
cannot set up tents nor can we cover our
children this is the masasi camp in
southern Gaza the Israeli military has
designated it as a safe Zone but there's
no Aid it's undeveloped land where
already desperate people are living in
squalid
conditions and Strikes in Rafa near the
Egyptian border have swn fear in those
who have fled their homes to seek safety
in the city's
Camp despite international calls for a
ceasefire heavy Urban combat
intensifies
[Applause]
we're in the midst of persistent
fighting along the entire strip we're
advancing in stages of combat
eliminating terrorists including senior
commanders hiding in underground tunnels
and also destroying terrorist
infrastructure the UN has warned that
Gaza is teetering on a humanitarian
catastrophe with hospitals unable to
care for the injured and the growing
threat of disease sweeping through
refugee
camps
Stephen Ryan is a rapid deployment
coordinator at the international
committee for the Red Cross and joins us
from Southern Gaza how dire is the
situation for civilians as the focus of
fighting extends to the entire
strip well thank you for having me on
this morning firstly and as your
listeners will have just seen and heard
the situation in Gaza is Indescribable
the conditions that civilians are facing
the loss of life that continues to
happen and the the extreme challenges
that organizations such as the
international Committee of the Red Cross
the IC orc are facing and bringing Aid
in to Gaza and being able to distribute
it safely under the current conditions
we've reached the limit of humanitarian
action in the environment like this
Stephen with 1.8 million people
displaced how many people does that mean
you can actually reach if you've already
reached your
limits well in these sorts of conditions
one of the things that we need
absolutely is a greater degree of agid
to be able to enter the gasa strip right
now people are without many people are
without food water as you've seen people
are without shelter people are without
sanitation facilities and these
conditions are absolutely inhumane but
along with additional Aid coming in
while some Aid is trickling in there's a
need for more but there's also the need
to be able to distribute it safely and
to make sure that we're able to do this
in an organized way in these current
conditions while people are moving
fleeing fighting from wherever they can
go to wherever they can at least imagine
that they might be safe this makes
humanitarian operations extremely
difficult certainly we have uh great
challenges in the getting the relief
into Gaza but the security conditions on
the ground are not conducive to being
able to provide humanitarian assistance
and this is utterly unacceptable H how
are you managing to stay safe and keep
your own people safe while trying to
help uh the people of gas
well certainly the ICC is continuing its
activities on the ground with the
limited resources that we have uh in
particular our activities are focused on
health we're supporting hospitals here
and we have a medical surgical team who
are providing assistance and uh
operations and surgeries to people that
have been wounded by the fighting but
these hospitals are overwhelmed in
recent days I was visiting one of these
hospitals and they're they're full of
people jam-packed I don't think that you
can possibly imagine that these places
of safety and refuge uh are also places
where uh uh hundreds of people are
treated each day uh due to wounds that
are caused by the ongoing fighting in
addition people are struggling because
many diseases are at uh at risk of
breaking out people are very simple
things like uh simple you know illnesses
related to the cooling weather related
to the unsanitary conditions
and this is making it very difficult for
them to access medical care because the
number of people affected by the
fighting continues to be extremely large
our teams are doing their best that they
can right now here in Gaza but it's not
going to be enough we need much much
more access and we need much more safety
to be able to do our work and what about
another truce I mean that helped the
humanitarian situation somewhat recently
do you expect any help from the UN
Security Council when it votes later
today on a push for a ceasefire
well certainly our view is uh that this
recent pause in the fighting was a
moment of respite for people who have
been uh been devastated over the past
more than two months uh anything that
brings restes the civilians who are
affected by this conflict is a welcome
step but it's up to the it's up to the
people who are at the security Council
these leaders to recognize that now we
have reached a point where civilians
continue to suffer to an unacceptable
agree we the International Community of
the Red Cross will remain here in Gaza
providing assistance regardless of the
outcome of any of these discussions but
right now what's needed is a recognition
that civilians have are continuing to
suffer deeply you're doing an amazing
job stepen Ryan from the ICC in southern
Gaza thank you for being on DW
today